Testing, testing, one, two, three, four,
testing, testing, one, two, three, four.
Testing, four, three, two, one, four, three, two,
one, testing, four, three, two, one. This is test,
testing, X, Y, Z, X, Y, Z. One, two, three, one, two,
three. This is, I believe, Monday, the 27th of
August, and we're in the Evans Library, room 206.
And today I have the pleasure of chatting with a
longtime neighbor and friend, Dr. Joe Dixon,
professor of soil and crop sciences. To begin
with, to introduce you to anyone who might listen
or read, give a biographical sketch of yourself.
Where did you grow up and what did mom and dad do and
what did you do, where did you go to high school and
then college and any other experience before you
moved here? I was born in Clinton, Kentucky, which
is the county seat of Hickman County, Kentucky, on
the very western end of the state. My mother was a
schoolteacher there off and on during my early
life. and my father, Jack Dixon, was also a teacher
and an administrator. He served as principal of
some schools in the county and eventually was
superintendent of schools in the county and
unfortunately died when I was a small child and I
had his example but not his advice from day to day.
And my stepfather was a farmer, so I grew up on the
farm in Hickman County and attended the public
schools there and graduated from a rural school
called Fulgham, which is not existent today. The
schools have been consolidated in Clinton, the
county seat. From there, I went to Murray State
College, it was then, Murray State University
now, and got two years of my academic work off. And I
had some vision that I might want to go on for
graduate work someday, so I transferred to the
University of Kentucky in Lexington. and
continued my bachelor's work and completed it
there in 52. And at that time, the Korean conflict
was underway. And so I looked for a job, but I wasn't
very employable. I eventually went to work with
the Extension Service, Agricultural Extension
Service, that is, in the neighboring county to my
home county. And while I was in Fulton County, I had
some good experience with agricultural
extension, 4-H club and such. But then the
military called me in and I served during the
Korean conflict, getting my training and then
eventually going to Korea and serving there and
going back and forth to Japan a bit. And so I had some
Far Eastern experience that was beneficial to the
government and to me. And then, while I was there, I
was contacted by W.A.C. Dr. C. was the professor in
soil science, agronomy, at the University of
Kentucky. and he had gone through the records of
students that had good marks and sent us an
invitation to apply for graduate study. And so I
responded to that and that was a happy situation in
that I was pleased to get started on a master's
degree and of course the GI Bill was available and
that gave me some financial support. I was
actually married during the last term as my
bachelor period and my wife Martha Jane came and
worked at the University of Kentucky for that less
than a year that I had to finish out. And then she
returned to West Kentucky and waited there while I
was in the military. So we returned then to the
University of Kentucky and finished my
bachelor's there in 56 and by then I had an offer to
come to University of Wisconsin on a wharf, a
fellowship, which was also nice to go along with
the GI Bill. And I pursued my doctoral degree in
soil science under a well-known professor, M.L.
Jackson, in the soil science department at the
University of Wisconsin. And when I completed it
in 58, there were jobs in those days because PhDs
were not all that abundant in soil science. and
universities were expanding their graduate
programs. But I wasn't too pleased with the
offerings so I accepted a National Science
Foundation fellowship and stayed at the
University of Wisconsin for a year and did some
teaching and went back and took up some courses
that I had missed when I went through the first time
because I started in a small college. and
anticipating a job at Auburn University, which I
did take then at the end of 59. And I served at Auburn
on the faculty as assistant professor and
I believe associate before I left in the growing
program in the agronomy and soils department
there. And in nine years, I was there. And during
that period, I served as a member and then
eventually the chairman of a committee, which is
still going on today on soil mineralogy
throughout the southeastern 13 states. George W.
Coonsey was on that committee also. And when he got
an offer to come up as dean of the graduate college
at Texas A&M, he invited me to come and look at his
post here. And I must say it was not exactly an easy
decision because at Auburn I had a lot of new
research equipment, a new building, and I had sort
of come from rags to riches there. money was more
available in those days for research and
teaching. And yet I liked the potential to come to
Texas A&M because it's a larger university and I
wanted to be able to specialize, whereas at Auburn
I taught geology, undergraduate soils, graduate
soils, and soil mineralogy, my specialty. Well, I
didn't feel I could reach my potential with such a
broad selection of courses to teach. And so I came
to A&M. I think I came here for about $9,000 a year.
Now, what year was that? And that was in 1968.
As far as you were aware, what reputation in the
general area of Soil and Crop Sciences did A&M have
then as an institution? Well, it was a growing
institution. We were in a very old building, one of
the very oldest ones here at A&M. At that time, they
did have some new research equipment that had
gotten a few years before. But in general it was,
just speaking now just about the physical
conditions where I came to work, they were not very
good. But I could see a lot of potential here
because at that time the bringing aboard of
co-education was in sight and
there was a distinct spirit of growth and the
challenge that was given to me here particularly
was that they wanted to build a world-class
university and I appreciated that then and more
through the years so I always considered the whole
world my opportunity and so I started things that
took me overseas occasionally and it shaped my
whole career here. Describe the process that led
to your being selected? As far as you're aware,
were they looking at other people? Did you come
visit? Did they sit with you somewhere? And was
there an interview and so forth? Yes, I came here.
As
I reflect on it now, I came here by myself and looked
at the job. And Dr. Morris Bloodworth interviewed
me and showed me around, and I remember him showing
me a soil physics laboratory and saying, isn't
that typical of the mass of a soil physics
laboratory? That's rather characteristic.
They're not the tidiest of facilities, usually.
And in general, I sort of had that impression of
what I saw. but I still liked the future prospects
and I'd say A&M was emerging in my view. Did you meet
some other senior people on that trip? Yes, I met
Curtis Godfrey who was here and Curtis was a very
personable man and had a lot of experience in the
field and I liked that very much because he was
doing what had been half of my position back in
Auburn and so I realized then I had a colleague who
would tell me about things in the field that I
wouldn't have to embrace them all. And he asked
good stimulating questions that I can recall that
was good for me as well as hopefully for him. And of
course, George Kunze was still around and he was a
gracious host. And his wife, they had me in their
home and and shared some good German sausage with
me and things like that. So I felt very much at home.
Also, Grant Thomas, who was a chemist that I had
known by reputation, he was here. And I remember
visiting with him. So in general, I was quite
pleased with the personnel. During that visit,
did anything go wrong? Were there any goofs that
anybody made or anything get confused or mixed up?
I don't really have any negative reflections on
that visit except it was a dreary time of the year
and I came in here by air, and when I left, I
remember, and it was the airplane, it was a very
small airplane. Davis Airlines? Davis Airlines,
and I remember when the pilot got in, and I got in
behind him and closed the door. And in that
situation, rainy season in that small aircraft, I
felt this was some experience, shall we say. It
wasn't all roses, by any means. When you got home,
what did you tell your wife about the trip? Well, I
think I told her that while it didn't look very
glamorous, but I thought that it would be good for
us in the long run. And then we came back together,
drove over, and with our children, and did,
after we had agreed to take the post, looked and
purchased a house, as a matter of fact, while we
were here. of which you know Dr. Monroe was near
where you later built a house. It was already
built? It was built, but it wasn't quite finished.
And so we got the privilege of going through and
making selections of colors if we needed to make
any. Most of them were already made. But we did have
the privilege of saying some things and approving
others. So it was... on the extreme. Make believe
that I had never been here before. Describe where
that was in terms of the edge of town and how you got
to that house at that point. How did you, what roads
led to it? Well, as I remember, we went down Texas
Avenue and then we turned on Southwest Parkway,
but it was not a parkway much in that day. In fact,
the street development was incomplete, as I
recall it. Maybe in front of the house there was a
street and that far in, but I think on out toward
Wellborn Road it had not been completed at that
time. And was there anything south of, In terms of
streets being laid out, there was nothing south of
that one. I don't think so. I think that the word I
got was that Mr. Fitch had 400 acres that lay south
and that he was going to develop that. And that's
more or less what happened, I think. Describe then
the move for you and the family. How did it go? It
went quite well. We did things in a frugal way. We
had a Volkswagen and a Chevrolet, and we tagged the
Volkswagen on the back of the Chevrolet and drove
over. And our furniture and things came by van,
Mayflowers, I recall. And I think the only problem
that came when we got here, Martha said, those hats
of mine look like they're in bad conditions. And
she reported that to the carrier and two people,
two gentlemen came out from the local trucking
firm in Bryan and they were afraid she was one of the
men of money. for those hats. That wasn't quite the
case, but they managed that all right. What was
your, in the first months you were here, what was
your impression of Texans and of people in Bryan
and College Station? How were you received? Well,
I think pretty well. I remember the first day we
went to A&M Methodist Church, there was a short
little gentleman, very frail in body, named
Bryson. He met us in the Northex of the church and I
think he had gotten wind of the fact that we were
here to look for a job or taking a job and so he sort of
picked up the ball at that point and made us feel
very welcome in the church and then visited us and
the minister visited us at home. I would say that
that was a singular point that made us feel quite
welcome here. Fred Bryson. Yeah, Fred Bryson. Was
this in the summer that you all moved? Yes, we moved
in early June, as I recall, and I think my
appointment only started at the end of the month,
or the first of July, perhaps. In other words, we
had a period. I remember asking Morris Bloodworth
when I came, well, what should I do with this time
between now I've arrived and that? He said, well,
you take a good vacation because you're going to
need it, something to that effect. How was the heat
for a newcomer? Well, we made our adjustments, but
that wasn't exactly a rosy experience because the
grass on the lawn hadn't been established and the
heat came on. But it was a moist year, a spring
anyway, so we had plenty of water at that time and we
managed things all right. And we had help from the
builder who was building a house next door when it
came to establishing the lawn. He loans us a
tractor and And across the street there was Babe
and Art Nightingale, and they were very
hospitable and helpful. and of course gave some
professional advice on furniture and things. So
we felt very much at home. The Rusynks were living
down the street and they were obviously very
friendly people and they had children about the
age of ours. So all those things made life pleasant
even though we might have had to drive over some
dirt street to get to some places. Right, then you
get to the campus, describe your office and
research facilities. Okay, the office was on the
west side of the old state chemist building, which
I think is about the second oldest building on
campus, and two large hybrid live oaks just
outside the window. and I remember those because
that shade was so important because that window
air conditioner worked awfully hard and having
some shade there made it more pleasant,
temperature-wise and viewing-wise.
Being a very old building, there was a lot of
disorder, but Dr. Kunze had fenced off the x-ray
machine lab, which had to be humidity controlled,
and that meant that I had two cool spots. One of them
was in the x-ray room and the other one was in my
office. And in between, the temperature varied.
But I was rather pleased to have some technical
help during those days. And actually, technical
help was more available then. And then I inherited
a student from Dr. Kunze. And we collaborated
some. So it was, and a lot of the other equipment
inside the x-ray machine was quite old, and we
struggled with that a bit. But new things were
coming aboard, and some of my colleagues in soil
chemistry helped by sharing some of that. So it was
a period of growth, and that made it more
attractive, even though the surroundings in that
building were It was a bit dismal at times.
Describe the department, about how big was it and
who were the big names, who were the well-known
people? Well, as I mentioned earlier, Curtis
Godfrey was well-known for his work in soil
taxonomy. And Grant Thomas had not been here so
long, but he was a flamboyant sort of person. And he
was known throughout the country, and it was nice
to have him as a colleague. But unfortunately, he
didn't last very long. He got, I think, into a
little tight somehow and was offered a job
elsewhere. And he, in fact, went to the University
of Kentucky, which is my old alma mater. But he
probably did that regrettably because I know he
came back and collaborated for a few years, but
somehow he didn't fit the social scene here like he
wanted to, I think. But we had, I remember, a TVA
representative
here at that time that kept us in touch with
Tennessee Valley Authority, which provided
particular fertilizer formulations. And that
linked the federal... fertilizer development
laboratories with the university and he managed a
program here. I know his name, although at the
moment I can't call it for you. About how many
faculty in the department then? That's always
been a difficult question to answer at A&M. We had,
now Alan Swoboda was a young faculty member and I
enjoyed collaborating with him. He later became a
builder in the local community.
I always thought of the department as having about
two dozen faculty and about half of them were soils
and about half of them were crops. But now
that's... that's generalizing quite a bit.
Because, see, we have about a dozen research and
extension centers scattered throughout the
state. And those people are interactive with us
and we with them. And therefore, usually when you
look at statistics on size, we would come up with 60
to 75 people involved. And more than half of those
were located at these research and extension
centers. And that was great for me. I'm a soil
mineralogist. I like to study different kinds of
soil and having some people working on rice down at
Beaumont and reducing the environment,
chemically speaking. And then other people
working at Overton and deep sandy soils and
deep-rooted crops and totally different soil
regime. And then at Lubbock we had people working
where water stress was greater and more on the
physical problems with soils. And then of course
El Paso. having the real desert-like conditions.
So as a young scientist, that was really an asset to
me, and I always enjoyed that. And we always got
together a couple of times a year, one here in
College Station and one at one of those remote
units, and talked about our research and teaching
and so on. And that made our professions very
lively and stimulating. Compared to what you had
known at Kentucky and Auburn, were these
arrangements and opportunities similar? Did
they have research opportunities all across
their states through their experiment station
and extension services? They did to some degree,
but being smaller states, and like Kentucky is at
about the same latitude, it doesn't vary a whole
lot. in north-south direction, there wasn't as
much diversity. And I guess being somewhat prone
toward geographic movement, I just liked the
potential of a large land area. And we had people
coming in Morris Bloodworth worked down in the Rio
Grande Valley during some of his early career. And
he worked for World Bank a bit. And so we had people
coming in occasionally from other countries like
Saudi Arabia and from Great Britain connected
with the World Bank. I remember John Coulter
coming in and Mansour Aba Hussein came from Saudi
Arabia and did a a post-doctoral here, a
sabbatical here. And so eventually I had research
contracts with the Saudis and went over there
myself. So the idea that the executive part of the
university was promoting that was a sort of a
global village and that we should interact
widely, fit it in beautifully with my plans as a
soil scientist because I could learn a lot when I
went to give a workshop in Saudi Arabia and And when
I had people in from Bali, Indonesia, to talk about
soils from volcanic materials and things like
that. And those experiences made teaching much
more exciting for both for me and for the students.
Was your appointment a joint appointment with the
experiment station and the university? Yes, it
was. and that of course is true of most all the
members of my department and Murray Milford I
think was the only one in the department for many
years that had an all teaching appointment and he
had some administrative responsibilities.
The
opportunities that this joint appointment, I had
a third teaching and I had two thirds research. I
think one of the greatest things about my career at
Texas A&M from a personal point of view is that I had
I could teach soil mineralogy, which was my
specialty, my research area. every year. I
suspect that it's the only institution that has
taught soil mineralogy, if not consistently,
almost every year. During my 32 or 33 years of
tenure here and Kunze's tenure before, it was
taught often. I don't know exactly the frequency.
And that, I like that. After having to skip around
from Of course, semester to semester at Auburn,
which I found very difficult to do adequately, I
liked the continuity. And I brought so many things
into my teaching from the research and made my, you
know, talking about something one reads is
usually pretty stale compared to talking about
something one has observed and written up as
research. And at least it made my work more
pleasant.
That evolved into several things. Just a second.
What did you bring with you in terms of equipment
and or note? What stuff did you bring to put in your
office and in your lab? Well, when I left
Wisconsin, M.L. Jackson had some old atomic
models. And I think I had a few of those that kind of
got me started. Kunze left me some here. And so I had
built up some atomic models, which I used in
introducing crystal structures of these various
minerals that occur in soils. And I worked on x-ray
equipment at Auburn, and I had the same kind of
x-ray equipment here, so that made the transfer of
skill and familiarity easy. And I had built
thermal analysis equipment in my master's degree
at Kentucky. I actually inherited thermal
analysis equipment here, so there was quite a bit
of transfer of familiarity of equipment. I think
the thing that had a synergistic effect, because I
taught often, I was under more persuasive power
just within my own career to get some text material
out. I was teaching with a book written by a
geologist that was intended for researchers and
consultants. at the University of Illinois, and
that was very inadequate as a text, so I really was
having to develop my own text material. And so I
started about 1974 developing
a book to teach with, and we finished it and
published it in 1977. And that book was 900 pages,
published through the Division Nine, the Soil and
Mineralogy Division of the Soil Science Society
of America. And I was the lead editor on that book.
Dixon and Weed were the names on the book. And then
we published that book totally revised in 1989,
and it was 1,200 pages. So we had lots of material.
The students complained a bit about it. So we
designed another book, and it'll be published in
February 2002. And it'll be a smaller book. It'll
only be 750 pages. And that gave people in a wide
geographic area some visibility of the program at
Texas A&M. And as a consequence of that...